Thomas Campbell began researching
altered states of consciousness
with Bob Monroe of the Monroe Institute
before the term out of body experience
had been coined.
As a young physicist with an open mind
he launched himself into states of consciousness
he had never believed possible.
Then spent the next 35 years
researching the phenomena
while working his day job
developing missile defense systems.
His summation of how we create
and experience our own reality
took form in a very large book titled, My Big Toe.
TOE meaning, Theory of Everything.
Which also explains the telling of future events.
Tom, you had an unusual start to this
what is now becoming your passion
and the very thing that I'm here
listening to you lecture on.
And that was in your earlier days,
early twenties, right?
You were a physics student.
You were also a double major,
physics and math.
So you were a brainiac.
But on the other hand you were
really driven by a deeper curiosity.
Oh yes.
Can you talk a little bit about what happend
in those years going into your association with Monroe?
Sure.
I had just gotten out of graduate school.
So that did put me probably,
you know 26, 27, something like that.
Late twenties.
And when I walked into my office
my boss at that time,
came in and he tossed a book at me
and said, Tom read this.
And I caught the book in my lap
and I looked at it and it was
Bob Monroe's, Journey Out of the Body.
And I'm thinking what is this?
I've only been there a few months,
and was this a test?
And how am I supposed to act?
So I did what he said
'cause when your boss says
read the book, you read the book
That's an interesting thing
to have happen actually in that environment.
I was working for Army Technical Intelligence.
There you go.
Yes and at that time it was
Foreign Science and Technology Center,
since it's changed it's acronyms a few times.
But in any case I read the book
and in a couple of weeks
I did my report which I knew was coming.
And I told him the truth.
I said how do you know whether this is real
or whether this guy is just making it up?
I mean how can you tell?
If he's not making it up and it's real
then that's like a wow!
You know, I'm a physicist and what I do is,
I'm interested in reality.
Understanding reality.
How does it work?
And this is a whole 'nother phase.
A whole 'nother piece of reality
that I don't know anything about.
So that's really exciting.
On the other hand,
if this guy's just trying to sell books
by making up interesting stories
it doesn't mean anything.
And, you know, how do you know?
How do you resolve that?
So that's where it was
until a few months went by.
And the boss comes in and says,
hey, we found out Bob Monroe
lives just about 45 minutes out of town.
I was in Charlottesville, Virginia at the time.
And we've made arrangements to go see him.
Would you like to come with us?
And you couldn't of kept me away from that
for anything 'cause I wanted the answer to that question.
You know, is this guy nuts or what?
And when we got there
we drove into what was then Whistlefield Farm.
It was about a 500 acre estate that Bob Monroe owned.
Beautiful estate.
House up on the hill.
You know the manor house.
You know, Virginia country gentlemen style.
Very beautiful place.
Two lakes.
White board fence.
Horses running along inside the fence
with the car, you know, that sort of thing.
And my first thought was
this guy's not in it for the money.
For whatever he makes in books
is a pitiless compared to, you know,
what he already has under control
because of this estate that he's living on.
So I knew that wasn't it.
And then Bob comes out.
And Bob is just as likable and straightforward.
And honest to God he wasn't selling anything.
He wasn't trying to convince anybody of anything.
He was just, he actually acted more like
the engineers I was used to talking to.
He was very straightforward, very scientific.
He wanted things to make sense.
So that was my introduction to Bob Monroe.
I just happened to be at the right place at the right time.
So toward the end of that day,
Bob took us up to the lab that he had just built.
It was an empty building.
Didn't have anything in it.
And he said.
And we were a bunch of us.
We're all scientists and engineers.
That's Foreign Technology Center,
we studied foreign technology
to learn what we could learn from it.
I was working physics modeling at the time.
So he said, well you guys are all scientists and engineers.
Would any of you like to help me,
you know, staff my lab and build equipment?
And my hand shot right up in the air
'cause I'd been a student all my life
and that's what you do when you answer a question
you stick your hand in the air.
So I must of looked kind of silly
sticking my hand up in the air
but that was what I did.
And this other guy Dennis Mennerick.
He was also young. He was an engineer.
He was a double E and I was a physicist.
You know, we both said yeah we'd love to do it.
Everybody else sat there and looked at their feet.
So Bob said, okay call me up
you know, and we'll do something.
And Bob went out of town.
And eventually we did meet with Bob
and we did instrument his lab.
We did do the equipment.
We build equipment.
Custom built a lot of the equipment at that time.
And we scrounged up other equipment
from the institutions of learning
where we knew they had extra equipment.
And Bob started to fulfill his part of the bargan
was to teach us how to do out of body
and how to experience the things that he experienced.
We wanted to experience them
otherwise we'd never know
whether they were real or not.
We had to have it as our experience
and we both knew that.
And in my mind I thought, well you know,
the best thing that could happen
was I'll learn some really neat things
and I'll have a lot of fun.
The worst things that could happen is
this guy's bogus as a three dollar bill
and I'll just leave, you know?
So that was my thought.
Well, Bob was genuine.
He was real.
His experiences were real.
He was straightforward.
And he did teach us in some months, some years.
He did teach Dennis and I both to go out of body
and whatever we wanted to, kind of on demand.
And we actually, Dennis and I,
primarily Dennis I guess in this case.
We came up with the Hemi-Sync
which is now the, which is now the,
kind of the defining technology of TMI.
That Dennis saw that at work in the library.
Scientific American by Oster, I think.
This would have been, it was an old article.
He read it in the Scientific American
and they were talking about
entraining brainwaves in this article.
And about the research that had been done
and the history of it and so on.
And Dennis thought, let's try this.
Because we had been trying everything in the lab.
Bob had these four hertz,
four cycles per second oscillations
just as he exited body.
That was one of the artifacts
of his going out of body.
Which is essentially like low theta, right?
It's where you're not in sleep,
you're just in a conscious state on the border, yeah.
And he had these oscillations.
So we, just as you said,
we associated those with brainwaves.
Right.
And we used the EEG.
We measured 'em and we did get brainwaves.
And we could actually see the oscillation on the EEG.
The patterns would oscillate.
So we decided that well this would be a good thing to try.
We were in the mode of just cut and dry.
It was all experimental to us.
There was no theory.
It sounds like so much fun.
There was no theory and we had done everything.
I sat on a stool with two huge
capasitors on either side of my head
trying to oscillate the pineal gland.
We did everything we could think of
that would enable us to create an altered state
that would then be one that you could jump
to the out of body from that altered state.
And we wanted to be able to reproduce it.
We were looking for science.
So anyway, Dennis got this idea
and he made a binaural beat tape.
He borrowed the equipment.
He made the tape.
And Bob was out of town that week.
I think he was out at Esland giving a program.
So Dennis came to the lab and I came with him
and he put this tape on that he made.
And we listened to it and it was like
wow, that worked, you know?
That was good, yeah.
It just was so much better than
the sound that Bob had been playing.
He had a little sound generator that he was using.
But it wasn't as potent.
Was it more like white noise?
It was pink noise and he was trying
to modulate that noise at the four hertz.
So it almost sounded like brushes on a drum.
(mimicking four hertz beat sound)
A little surf-ey, you know, a little like surf,
but a little more like brushes on a drum.
But it was a modulated four hertz,
you had a four hertz beat which is about,
(mimicking four hertz beat sound)
That's about four hertz and then that would rise and fall
sort of like with a two or three second which was a delta.
You know, it had a low delta,
but it had this four hertz riding on it.
And it was a very pleasant sound.
It was pink noise but it was relaxing.
That was it's main function.
This was more than relaxing.
This binaural beat actually entrained your brainwaves.
And when we measured it with the EEG we could see
that the brainwaves getting into sync.
You start and you have some in everything.
You have a little bit of theta but you have more alpha,
you have a lot of beta.
And all of these energy spectrum are
being triggered kind of at the same time.
You spread all over.
And then you start playing this binaural beat
and suddenly everything falls away except
the theta state and the theta state grows.
So that's what we noticed on the EEG.
So then we experimented with it.
And Bob came back and he was excited about it too.
And we went through a lot of experiments
trying to say what should the bass frequency be?
Was it really four or was it 3.85? Was it this?
And we did experiments for months trying to optimize
the effect of, you know, what worked best.
Should you ramp it slowly? You know?
Start from the beta and work your way down?
And then start this or what?
And eventually we came up with what worked best.
And Bob then took that,
he tried it on all sorts of people.
You know, that was the idea.
People off the street needed to be able to
come to an altered state that took the ordinary person
10 years to learn how to do through meditation
and he wanted to be able to stimulate that.
Well it worked, people would come in there
and they would have these experiences.
They would go out of body.
Some of 'em would just fall asleep.
They would be well rested, you know?
Walk in his lab, put on the headphones, and clunk.
You know? They were gone.
And those were people who really--
Needed sleep.
Well, I don't think they needed sleep.
I think they really could not process what was going on.
They got into the larger reality and it just didn't
process for them so they shut it off.
So they just went to sleep and lost consciousness.
They weren't tired because as soon as the tape was over
they'd be awake just like that.
If they were asleep they would of continued to sleep.
They were just basically blanking out
the experience because they didn't,
they weren't successful dealing with it.
But what were you and Dennis doing with it?
Now, what Dennis and I were doing with it is
from then on these binaural beats
were added to all the tapes that Bob made.
To all the sounds that he made.
He had his generator guy
who designed the electronics
that made his sounds, so he put those in it
So that became part of our
instrumentation of the sounds that we were listening.
So Dennis and I would come out
and we'd make our own tapes.
The things that we liked
weren't necessarily the same things
that were best for everybody.
That was more at a common level.
After a while you don't need the same hand holding.
We don't need the ramp down.
That's just a waste of time.
You know, you just go right to it.
So we didn't necessarily like the same frequencies
that were good for us but not necessarily good
for a new person just off the street.
So we would play with our own and do that.
And we played with different volumes
and different intensities and different wave patterns.
We did sinusoids, triangle waves,
you know, all kinds of things.
We continued to do research on it.
And meanwhile every,
well it was probably,
I think it was three times a week.
Like Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays we'd go out to Bob's.
Bob would put us in the booth.
These were isolation booths.
And then he would lead us through the out of body thing
And after a while we didn't need much leading.
We'd just go.
And then we would report back.
He'd have microphones were suspended above our mouths.
And we were on water-beds in isolation chambers
that were acoustically isolated.
They were electromagnetically isolated.
They had metal walls that were grounded.
And we were in these chambers.
And he had three of 'em in a row.
I'd take the first one. Dennis took the last one.
So there was an empty one between us.
So he would do that and then we would go out of body.
And he would maybe give us a goal.
What it is we should do.
You know, contact someone.
And he may have some questions he wanted to ask.
And sometimes the questions were,
how do we do this better?
What frequencies are best?
You know, how, you know.
Trying to polish our own techniques.
Sometimes we would just have questions of our own
and we would report back but always we were in contact.
We would go out of body,
we'd interact with nonphysical beings
and then we would tell Bob what we saw,
what was said, you know, what was going on.
You and Dennis would
you guys would hook up together?
We did travel together sometimes.
Myself and Nancy Lee did that too.
But that was different.
This was like two of us would be there.
He would give us the same instructions
but we would interact singly, individually.
We were totally individuals.
He was getting two different view points on it.
And I think that's what gave him the idea because
our view points started to converge
after we got good at this.
They started to converge a lot.
And then he had the bright idea,
which is what you mentioned,
that Dennis and I should go out together.
And that was an experiment that we
repeated a couple of times.
And I repeated it with others as well.
Nancy Lee, at that time it was Nancy Lee Honeycut,
that was Bob's step daughter.
Now, married to Joe McMonigle.
We also went out and had an adventure together like that.
His instructions for Dennis and I were go above the
you know, go up above the lab
meet there in the out of body state
and then go on adventure together but stick together.
And we were in these isolation chambers
and so basically we did that.
And it probably took close to two hours
for us in this out of body thing.
And it was a very eventful one.
You know, saw a lot of things,
had a lot of conversations,
talked to each other.
It wasn't a dull time.
And we came back,
and we had been doing this now
for probably at this point two years.
So it had been a lot in two years.
What we're talking about is
three sessions a week with Bob.
Sessions lasted from about
6:30 in the evening
to about 2 o'clock in the morning.
And then we'd go home, at least I did.
I'd go home at 2 o'clock in the morning
and practice until it's time to get up to go to work.
And then I'd go to work.
And it's like having two jobs.
You know, we were working a job with Bob.
But you must have loved every minute.
I was loving it, it was fun
because we were learning things.
And of course in the lab everything had to be evidential.
Bob wasn't interested in giving us neat experiences.
He was interested in collecting evidence.
He wanted this to be science.
That's why he wanted scientists doing it.
He didn't want this to be, oh I had a wonderful experience
and I went out and I saw pink elephants dancing.
You know? And that's not what he wanted.
So he had us doing all sorts of things.
He had us reading, remote viewing, you know?
And then testing whether or not we saw what was right.
He had us healing.
He had us going places.
He had us going into the future
and reading newspaper headlines.
He had us doing everything
we could think of that would be evidential.
And the time we were two years in, you know,
the probability that what we were getting was random,
was probably about 1 in five million, you know?
We were getting things that were clearly paranormal data.
Data that you couldn't get by normal means.
Well now, how far in the future, for example--
We generally would go like a week.
And we'd read a newspaper headline
or something like that from a week in the future
and then we'd see what the headline said.
You know, it was this sort of thing.
So he had us going past, future, present,
healing, remote viewing, you know,
anything that we could think of
that then we could collect data on
to see whether we were right or not.
So over the years you kind of get a sense of
honing that, of what works, what doesn't.
You get better at it.
And we had done that but it was all intellectual.
Alright, I'm a scientist and I can see that
what I've just done, the data I've collected
was one in a million that I could
collect that data by chance.
That I could read that eight digit number
off the black board by chance, you know?
You can do the probability of that.
And I knew that it was
highly unlikely that it was chance.
I knew something was going on
but that's all in your head.
That's intellectual.
You know it, you believe it,
but it's not your knowledge at a deep level.
And this thing with Dennis was for me.
That was a big point for me.
So he had Dennis and I go out.
We had this adventure. We'd come back.
You know, we've been there for two hours
and it's been dark, you know.
And he's trained us to go and come back
and report and talk.
So we'd stumble out into the light
and it's always, you know, the bright lights.
And got down to the end of the hall.
And you have to know Bob Monroe.
He had a very sardonic and dry wit.
So we'd come there and he looked at us
and he grinned and he says,
do you two really think you were out together?
And we looked at each other and I said,
well yeah it seemed that way.
And he said, yeah it seemed that way.
And he said, well listen to this.
And he reached out and he flipped the two tapes.
Which was Dennis' audio and my audio.
Now, of course, we couldn't hear each other.
He talked to us indvidually.
So he'd ask Dennis, what are you seeing?
And then he'd ask me on a separate line,
you know, what are you seeing?
And he'd have these things.
So those tapes started to roll
and there was Dennis and I out of body
having conversations, you know,
answering each others questions,
seeing the same things,
having basically the same experience.
Now it was through Dennis' interpretation
and my interpretation.
You could see, just as if two people went on a vacation
and they were both talking about it
it's different but it's the same.
You know, you obviously can tell
they wen't on the same vacation.
That's the way this was.
And that hit me like a ton of bricks.
That hit me, not at the intellectual level,
but you know, deeper.
And the reason it hit me that way
is because to me, that meant
that what I was getting was objective.
You see if it just mine I could imagine
that there was something weird going on
that I was able to pick up this data paranormally.
But it was all subjective.
It was just something that happened through,
you know, my out of body, you know.
It was just me and you couldn't
really tell what was going on.
How was that happening?
Were you picking it up because you were there looking at it?
Were you getting that from somebody else's mind?
You know, what was the mechanism?
Was it really objective?
This had to be objective.
How else could Dennis and I
be talking about the same thing
unless we saw the same thing?
So it was kind of the validation you really--
A validation I needed.
And at that point, like I've told others,
I probably walked around for two weeks
in a bit of a daze, you know.
My God, this is real.
You know? This is real!
And that was a big turning point.
Now after that I didn't need to ask the question,
whether it real anymore.
I knew that it was real.
It was objective.
I was having those experiences.
Okay, now that I had context for the fact
that we were doing one in a million
data collection that was paranormal
I really had a sense of it being real.
Now, I'm a physicist.
So what I do for, you know, my career
is understanding how things work.
That's what physics does.
How does the world work?
What's the reality model that describes this?
So that was my passion.
That was my aim.
After that experience was to figure out
what is going on here?
What are the rules?
How do you go out of body?
You know, what does that mean?
What are the limitations?
So I spent the next
35 years, 40 years exploring.
Doing research, doing experiments.
Because you could eliminate some variables.
Say, what does this mean?
How far does this go?
How can I manipulate this?
You know, just like we were talking about earlier today.
You find out that you can see auras.
I got that early on where I started
seeing energy around people.
I realized that I could specify what the colors meant.
And then that means that,
well those colors aren't fundamental.
You know? That's your interpretation.
So when you say you could specify it
you could say, okay I want to use this color
to show me say, a healthy or a healthy portion
of the aura, the physical or something.
And you could choose.
Right or I could have, you know,
the way I wanted to, right,
the way I was interpreting the aura
I could choose what it meant.
So I had read, what's it called?
Man Physical and I don't know.
It was a Leadbeater, C.W Leadbeater back in the--
80's I was reading it.
Long, long time ago.
He published that probably in the late 1800's.
I know that he's one of the original theosophists.
And, Man Visible and Invisible, was the name of that.
And I had read that and I saw his colors
and that's basically the way I saw it
was the way he saw it.
But then I learned that
that didn't have to be the way it was.
You could change that all around.
And still be getting accurate data?
Get the same data.
You get exactly the same data.
And then I knew that those colors were just metaphors.
It was how you interpreted the data.
So you'd do experiments like that.
Dennis one day walked up
and tossed a picture in front of me.
And he said there were like five people in the picture.
He said, one of the people in the picture
is a renown psychic.
The others aren't.
Which one?
And I'd been seeing auras then
for only maybe three or four months.
So I looked at the thing and her aura
blossoms up around everybody in the picture.
And that was another lesson, you know?
You learn something.
That it doesn't have to do with
looking at a person and seeing their aura.
It has to do with your mind.
The person isn't that important.
You can have a metaphor
for the person who owns the picture.
And you could still see the same aura
and get the same information.
So I looked at them
and there was this one person
who had this big well-developed
bright aura and the rest of 'em didn't.
So I said, that one.
And he said, you're right.
You know?
And I didn't know actually that he knew.
I thought he just wanted me to tell him
which one it was but he knew the answer.
And it was a test, he wanted to see.
So really it was programmed by your
intention to connect with the data in the photo.
Exactly, the data is out there.
So you can connect with that data.
And then that was another big a-ha.
It's not something that goes around with the person.
It's just data and you can connect to it.
And you can get the data to present itself
in whatever format you want.
So as I experimented with these things
and you know, learned more and more
about how it worked and what didn't work,
I realized that basically everything was interpretation.
That reality is personal.
It's not objective.
You interpret it based on
what's inside of you,
you're experience.
That's how you interpret it.
And if to you bright red, zig-zaggy things
indicate fear or anger then that's
a good interpretation for anger, say.
Dark colors, you know we have this,
these general ideas about things. You know?
The cowboys in the white hats are the good guys
and the black hats are the bad guys.
So the stuffs that bad or evil,
or not good, well, we make it dark.
The stuff that's good and wonderful
and lovely, we make that light.
That's just kind of natural.
But then I found out that you didn't have to do that.
You could do it just the opposite if you wanted.
You could work on your healing
and make all the good stuff black.
Then I realized that was very helpful
because if you were looking for just a few
cancer cells loose, say, after an operation
and see whether they got it all,
you could go in and you could say
I want all the healthy stuff to be black
and I want those cancer cells
to be bright white, just glowing.
You can see a white spot
in a black background much much easier
than you can find a tiny black speck
in a white background.
You see? It makes a big difference.
You turned it into a negative,
so to speak, for your own convenience
so that you can view better.
So then I kinda learned that.
I said, hey these are just tools.
This white light and putting light on a subject,
you know, that's just metaphors and it's just tools.
So it was my own research.
It was my own experimentation
that allowed me to basically understand
something about how the reality worked.
And the more you understand
the easier it is to understand more.
So it just works that way. You know?
The more you know the more it works.
Now you can't just take one data point
and come to a conclusion.
You have to do this a lot of different ways.
It has to be consistent.
If it's not, it's not science.
You know, you're just making things up
because it's a good explanation for what you saw.
That's not it.
Science you have to do this
ten different ways, you know.
You have to slice it and dice it
from all different angles
and you have to have consistency.
If you can make it black instead of white
can you also make it red and blue?
Does it matter? Can you make it change?
Can you make things that are diseased change colors?
You know, be rainbow colors?
Can you make 'em pulse on and off?
And you can do anything.
It's all your intent. How are you gonna see it?
You're interpreting the data.
It's how you want to interpreting that data.
So our reality is personal.
It's how we interpret the data.
What we make of it.
So two people may get the same data
but have different interpretations.
Well that's because they live in separate realities.
We all live in our own reality.
Yeah and this is something,
I mean you had to really dive headlong
into the field of quantum mechanics
to really start making sense of a lot of this
because none of what you were discovering
really fits any classical scientific model.
No, it doesn't.
And it took me a while before I understood
what was going on.
And the thing that was nice,
once I got some a-ha moments
that things were going on
and I got some help too, you know.
Because ideas would pop in my mind out of nowhere.
So it wasn't just all me, you know.
I was getting some help
from my nonphysical friends.
And when I finally got the moment
that I understood, you know,
just everything kind of fit together.
It all comes together and you say a-ha.
You know, I see how it all works.
And that's when I realized
that I understood quantum mechanics.
You know I was a physicists but I never really understood
why that particle was a probability distribution
and how that really worked.
And the advice that my professors gave me is,
don't worry about it just do the calculations,
we know it works.
I didn't like that, you know?
That didn't sit well with me.
Not good for inquiring minds.
No, not good but it's,
so I worried over things like that
and eventually I realized
that the whole reality system,
not just tiny things like
quantum mechanics talks about
the very very small,
but the whole reality system works
in one consistent way.
And that you could explain quantum mechanics
on this larger understanding of reality.
And you could explain relativity from this
larger understanding of reality.
Relativity comes from C,
the speed of light being constant.
And you can explain that as basically
the design criteria for the virtual reality that we're in.
And then that make sense.
Well okay, to have the reality we have,
the way it works with our rule set,
to be able to have, you know,
differential calculus and smooth functions,
and the rest of it, you need an isotropic homogeneous space
In order to do that C has to be constant
because this is a virtual reality.
So the specification of
how much data and how much throughput
defines the constant and that's all it is.
It's just a design speck on the virtual reality.
And you know, voila there it is.
So then the two big issues in physics
for the last 60 years is how do you describe
quantum mechanics and relativity
under just one over arching understanding.
You know? One set of principles that explains both of those.
Well that was what Einstein was trying to do
with his unified field theory.
Suddenly they just fell out and I could see
where they were both coming from.
The same...
It's not like you had a separate explanation for both.
One explanation and they both fall out.
Well now that's good physics, you know?
So then you kind of get the idea,
well if this thing explains physics
and it explains metaphysics,
maybe it's got something going for it.
And this is My Big Toe.
Theory of Everything, Toe.
Yeah, of course Toe, Theory of Everything
is a term of physics, you know.
Einstein was the first really scientific
Toe, theory of everything
and that was unified field theory
and that didn't work out for him.
But it's big because it takes in
metaphysics and philosophy
and theology as well as physics.
And it's mine not because I'm proud of it,
but because if you don't have the experience
you don't own the experience.
And this is really big for you
because you're telling, I mean,
yes you can lecture
and explain theory and so fourth
but you also have a practice element say,
to conferences like this.
But you're also saying at the same time,
there is no guru or anyone else who can
shift your consciousness.
This still a practice that is very much your own.
You have to take the time and work with it.
It can't be given to you.
It can't be theoretical and be yours.
It has to be your experience.
And that's why it's My Big Toe.
My just means that if it's not your experience
it's not your knowledge.
You can have an intellectual appreciation for it.
I could explain it all to you
and you could get it all intellectually
but that's just a shadow of what's real.
It's not yours until it's your experience.
When it's in your intellect you have two choices,
you can believe it or you can not believe it.
Neither one is of any value.
And it won't take you any place important.
It's about growing up, it's about evolving.
It's about changing yourself.
And intellectual understanding doesn't do that for you.
You have to get it at a being level.
And it's at a deeper level.
So just getting an intellectual appreciation is nice
and it may help you understand things
and it may be a catalyst to your growth
because it may open your mind
and you say, oh hey I see.
Maybe it gives you permission to explore.
Yes, permission.
So it's not that you can't help somebody.
But you can't do it for them.
You can't carry them across the finish line.
They have to do it themselves.
You can help them get prepared.
You can produce an environment
that encourages their growth
but they have to grow.
And that's true everywhere.
It's not just true in exploring the larger reality.
That's true if you and I are old friends
and I'm trying to help you with a problem,
I can't solve your problem for you.
All I can do is provide for you an environment
in which you can more easily solve the problem for yourself.
And that's fundamentally true all over.
You can't tell anybody anything really
as far as what they ought to do,
or how they ought to do it,
or what reality's like.
They have to come to that on their own.
You can only give them an environment
that makes it easier for them
but they have to do it.
And as you say,
reality's highly subjective so that,
even more so you can't tell someone what it's like.
No, you can tell what it's like for you.
And that's a great mistake you see
if you tell people what it's like for you
then they think that's it because
we all have this belief that it's objective.
And Bob did this, you know.
Bob's books were wonderful because
he opened thousands of minds
to a larger reality.
But he also convinced thousands of minds
that this is the way that larger reality was.
This is the way it was for Bob.
This was Bob's interpretation.
But most people think that's
the objective reality and that's the way it is.
And somewhere up there there's this park
and there's this and all the things that Bob talked about.
Well these were his own interpretations.
And now you have people
trying to reproduce Bob's experiences
because those are the real experiences.
You see, and that's unfortunate.
Because they shouldn't be trying
to reproduce Bob's experiences,
they should be having their own experiences,
their own interpretations.
But just having the experience is not that significant.
You know, if having the experiences was significant
then drugs would help you evolve.
They could help you have an experience.
But drugs are harmful to your evolution.
So, it's not the experience,
it's understanding the experience.
It's growing from the experience.
It's being able to use that experience
to get a bigger picture of reality.
And to understand what you are,
who you are and what you should be doing.
If that experience doesn't do that for you
then it's just an experience, why bother?
It's just not that important.
And people have to have their own experience.
So when you tell, I have lots of people say,
well Tom what's it like? You know?
Tell me some of the things you've seen
and some of the things you've done and so on.
And they want stories.
I don't tell stories because it actually
is not helpful to those people.
It entertains them.
It excites them.
It may give them enthusiasm.
But it also gives them a belief.
Locks them into that's the way it is.
Makes it harder for them to do it themselves.
So in a way I'm actually hurting their ability to grow
by setting up another belief system in their mind
that now they have to overcome.
And that's just not--
Or try to aspire to either way.
It's not theirs.
It's not theirs and they don't need to either feel,
well gee I could never do that.
That's harmful to them.
And they don't have to feel,
that's what I need to do.
That's harmful to them.
So I don't tell stories because
it's just not helpful to people.
And if you're not at a point where
you are likely to have these experiences
then the story isn't going to help you.
To have somebody else tell you about it
is not helpful to you.
It's counterproductive.
Now if you already are having these experiences,
sure you can trade and you can talk
because they're common experiences.
They're just different interpretations.
And that's fine.
But it's not a thing that in a public broadcast
where you're going to you know,
thousands of people listening,
you don't want to tell stories.
You tell stories to people you know who also
understand and they realize it's interpretation
and you're not going to actually inhibit
their own growth because of it.
And today you talked about a lot of theory.
And it was interesting 'cause a lot of it was
through the computer model of reality.
Right? Or virtual reality.
And we would spend probably the next eight hours
you know, completing this interview
if we were to go into all of those tenants.
So what I thought we would do,
because people can certainly get in touch with you.
They can come to one of your conferences.
They can purchase your books.
Any number of things to start getting into
the fundamental principles behind
your big toe or My Big Toe as it is.
But I thought what we'd do is just
kind of toss out some things that happened
by way of ordinary or even
mild- phenomenal type of experience.
And you might explain to us
what kind of principles are at work
when these things happen.
Is that okay?
Sure let's do that.
Okay, so for example,
say someone decides they want to
know something about their future, right?
Maybe they haven't learned about creating.
What it means to literally create your own reality.
So you want to find out what your reality is going to be.
So you go to a psychic that has a
good reputation for kind of hooking in.
And that person reflects information back to you
and some of it's ooh, ahh.
And maybe a person they talk about or described
even does end up entering your life
in a few months time.
But let's talk about what's really happening
when your sitting with that intermediary.
Okay, well what's really going on there is that,
well we'll assume that this psychic
that's doing it is a bonafide psychic
doing it and can actually do this.
And what you have is that the person
connects to what I call the probable future database.
And that is part of how the larger system works.
If you understand how consciousness works,
that consciousness is just information
then information stored is a database.
Okay and one of the databases
that is in the consciousness system
is the probable future database.
And that's all the things that we might do
and the probability that we might do them.
Okay and this reality of course is a shared,
it's a multiplayer game, you know?
We have a lot of us in it and we interact.
So it's the probability of those interactions.
You know, what we might do.
What we might say.
How we might do it.
How we might take it.
How we would interpret it.
All the things that are possible
then are kind of worked out in probability
for everyone.
And you think, well gee that would be really hard.
I'm hard to guess, you know?
I'm a kind of a mysterious person
but it's not that hard to guess.
You have every thought, feeling, thing,
you've ever done since you've been here.
You're not that hard to guess.
That creates mathematical probabilities--
Yes that creates probabilities of future events
because there's a long history on you.
And it's not just history like the police have, right?
It's not just that you were arrested for this
or found doing that.
But this is every thought,
every feeling,
every intent,
that you've had.
Every dream, you know?
It's all the data.
So it's not that hard to project
given the choices that are available
what that person's likely to do.
And you're not projecting it,
what they're gonna a year from now.
You're only projecting what they're gonna do
in the next tiny increment of time.
You know? Tiny tiny increment of time.
Which is even easier.
And then you say well if that was the case,
if this was true, if that last projection
of the tiny increment was true,
we'll assume that's right now let's project
what the next increment will be
and the next one and you work your way out.
Well every time you do that you're making
an assumption that the last one was correct
which may not be a good assumption.
So your reliability goes down and down
and down the further out you can could go.
But you can run this out as far as you like.
And this is the probable future database.
Somebody has a precognitive dream?
That's where they get the data.
Somebody wants to tell a fortune?
That's how they tell the fortune.
They get into that database.
The database can be queried with intent.
And now these people doing it
don't know it's a database
and they're querying it with intent.
They have their certain tools that they use to do it.
Things that they do with their mind.
But the only active ingredient is consciousness.
Everything else is ritual, you know, and tools.
They may have you sit on a throne or you know,
incense and smoke or sprinkle holy water on you
or who knows what they might do, you know?
They may play certain music.
They may do all kinds of things.
But that's just their tool set
for focusing their mind
to get into this database
to find out what's probable for you.
And they also don't know it,
but you can get that data in any format you want.
Most people get it in pictures
because as we all know,
a picture's worth a thousand words.
And you can get a lot of data in a picture
very very quickly, yeah, in symbols.
So they get symbols and metaphors
that they have to interpret in terms of that person.
And if you practice it you get good at it.
So that's what's going on.
They're reading these databases.
Now the Hindus call these databases
the Akashic Records
They're just databases
in a digital information system
called consciousness.
So that's what that person's doing.
They're tuning into that future database
and if you practice it, like I said, you'll get good at it.
Astrology works pretty much the same way, okay?
That might be of interest to your listeners.
Astrology isn't about
where all the heavens are
in this way and that way.
Astrology is about
the consciousness of the astrologer.
If astrology was nothing more than placement
of heavenly bodies and then interperting
what they say that means in the book,
computers would be much better astrologers than people
because computers could compute
all of those angles and exactly where they were
to fifty decimal places and be super accurate
more than a person could ever be.
Computers are lousy
at casting, you know, fortunes
or doing horoscopes.
They don't do a good job.
They do real general kind of things
but they're not very good at it
because that's not the point.
That's not what's going on.
All of the signs and the times and the rest of it,
there's a lot of interpretation in there.
And in interpretation there's uncertainty.
You can interpret it this way or that way
it kind of gives you a general framework
but you have to interpret it.
That interpretation is the astrologists consciousness
going into the database, getting the data,
which is massaging the interpretation to make sense.
So it's their version of throwing the bones.
Yes
It's a tool.
And people use all kinds of tools.
Throwing the bones is a tool.
Reading the tea-leaves is a tool.
The crystal ball.
All of these things are things
that have uncertainty.
Okay, you look at the tea-leaves
and all this stuff is there just swirling around
or you can make up a whole lot of things out of that.
You know, it's like the Rorschach test.
You can look at it and see all sorts of things.
But what you see, if you're good at it,
is the imagery that you're getting
out of the future probable database.
That's what you interpret it to be.
You know, you can interpret
the Rorschach inkblot
to be almost anything.
Same with the tea-leaves.
Same with the planets and the alignments and all that.
They can be interpreted lots of different ways.
The active ingredient is consciousness.
There are people I know who have a pendulum.
And the way they consult with their guides
is they hold this pendulum
and if it goes around this way it's a yes.
If it goes around that way it's a no.
Okay, well they hold it.
Well the tiny little motions
that will make something turn like that
are really uncontrollable. Okay?
Well what happens is those tiny little motions
just happen to get controlled to produce
that they're asking about.
So if yes is a right answer
then that little tiny motion
turns into a yes.
If it's a no, it's a no.
So it's uncertainty in that servo system
that allows the system to manipulate the answer
to let that pendulum be an oracle. You see?
And we can make up all kinds of things.
You know the people who have you hold your hand up
and they say, you know,
do you like my baby sister?
And you say no and your hand goes down
and say, you do too! You know?
You were just lying there because, you know?
They do that sort of thing.
It's the same thing.
It's the conscious intent and they're using
very weak muscles that aren't used to strength
and because it's very subtle about those muscles
the system can make that like the pendulum
like the bones--
And they can all be extremely effective.
Yes they can all be extremely effective
but it depends on the person doing it.
It's that consciousness tint.
So then of course the scientists come in
and they say oh bogus!
Look okay, I'm gonna do it, you know?
And you Joe, my assistant, you stand up there.
It doesn't work.
Well of course it doesn't work.
You know?
Neither of them know how to access, you know,
the probable future database.
None of them can get into the past databases.
They're incompetent to do that.
It's not gonna work because
that's the active ingredient.
But people think the tools are really what matters.
It's not the tools.
It's not objective.
It's consciousness is the active ingredient.
So no, you can't get a computer,
You can't get a computer to give you a good horoscope.
It's not the tools.
So well then you say well then
horoscopes don't mean anything
because look you told me what
each one of these things mean.
I did it, I did the calculation.
It wasn't right.
Well, well it's not gonna be right.
That's not how it works.
It's consciousness is the ingredient
that makes all those things work.
Let's talk about something
you brought up twice now.
You talked about, you got a little help
from your nonphysical friends.
And when you were a little kid
you used to have a fair amount of contact
with nonphysical friends.
But earlier in the lecture you were talking about,
it may not, our guides, the beings that we
feel and refer to in our own minds
and develop our own perceived relationships with,
maybe I didn't understand what you were saying.
You mentioned that it's not as though these
guides are sitting around waiting for
an impulse from us or a request
because they'd be bored out of their gourd.
If that was the sole objective was to hang around
and wait for a person to request something.
You said it's something more that's
born out of the need in the moment.
Can you explain that?
Our guides, though this is just a word guides.
That's kind of a new age word, right?
What it is, it's our interface.
It's our personal interface
with the larger consciousness system.
That's how the larger consciousness system
communicates with us, interfaces with us.
Now it might not be guides,
it might be your intuition.
Some people have very strong intuitions
that kind of tells them what to do and what not to do.
Whether to turn right or turn left.
And those that personalize that
call it guides.
So guides is a metaphor.
It's not a being, like I say, sitting there,
you know, watching every,
just waiting for you to ask them a question.
You know? To come at your beck and call.
It's the larger consciousness system interfacing with you.
If you have a need, if you ask the question,
if you communicate with that guide,
the larger consciousness system will communicate with you.
And it will use a constant interface.
The interface isn't gonna change all the time.
That would be confusing.
So you get to know these guides.
You get to, you know, they have personalities.
They have senses of humor.
Yeah, very specific. Yeah.
Yeah, they're like individuals
but that you have an individual interface.
And that is your interface then with the larger system.
Sometimes you have two guides.
Sometimes you have three guides, you know?
It's this sort of thing.
And you get this relationship built up.
But that's your relationship
with the larger consciousness system.
You just make a metaphor in your mind
that that's a guide because you can't conceive
of it being any other thing than another person.
See, that's your model.
That's your belief system.
If it's somebody I'm talking to that's talking with me
and I'm having a conversation then it's a person.
If it's a person, it's a separate person from me.
So it's like me and this person.
We're two individuals, were' having this talk.
I ask questions, he helps me out.
You know, we whatever.
We turn that into another individual
sort of like us but knows more.
That's just our way of interpreting
that interface with the larger conscious system.
But that's fine.
You can give 'em a name.
You can give 'em a turban.
Anything you want.
And it doesn't matter.
It matters not at all.
It's for our convenience.
It makes us feel better.
You know, we do this all the time.
When people go visit Uncle Fred,
you know, who died 10 years ago.
For some reason Uncle Fred's wearing the same suit
that he wore, you know, when he was here.
The way they remember him.
He's dressed in the same period cloths.
He's wearing the same kind of stuff.
He's still playing the ukulele just like he used to.
So we have this image of Uncle Fred.
Well you think Uncle Fred is just sitting there
playing his ukulele, you know,
waiting for us to call him back
so he can interact with us?
Of course not, Uncle Fred's way gone.
This is an interface with the larger system.
This is Uncle Fred in the historical database.
This is the model of Uncle Fred
without freewill that I was talking about.
Okay so, yes you can do that
but why is he dressed like that?
Well, that's because that's comfortable for us.
That's the way we remember him.
That's to us the essence of Uncle Fred.
So of course that's our interpretation of Uncle Fred.
Now what happens when it's somebody we don't know?
Well we don't know how to dress them
because we don't know them.
What do we do? We put a robe on 'em.
All these people wear robes because
a robe is a fashion that never goes out.
Right? Everybody wears robes.
And if we don't really,
to the detail of what they look like,
then they have a hood over their robe
and we really can't see their face because
if we saw their face then that would
set up a whole bunch of another inquiry for us.
Who was it and why?
So we don't need that.
So if we don't need that we don't get that.
So we get a robe figure,
we really can't see the face.
It doesn't matter. We communicate just the same.
So all of that is what we bring to the table.
It doesn't mean that that isn't real.
That it isn't a real communication.
It just means that for it to communicate to us
it needs to take that form so we recognize it.
If it didn't have Uncle Fred's cloths on playing a ukulele,
we wouldn't know that it Uncle Fred.
But we recognize it immediately.
Okay so, the larger conscious system
is communicating with us.
If it's communicating with us with about Uncle Fred
then it looks like Uncle Fred.
If it's communicating about something else
it may look like, you know, some other figure.
If you happened to be very religious
it might look like Mary.
If you happened to be some other religion
it may look like one of your ancestors
come to talk with you.
You know, it's just how you,
it's the model of reality you build up
in your own mind, in your own beliefs.
And you have to communicate
to somebody through that filter.
Otherwise they won't get it.
They won't understand.
So the larger consciousness systems
communicates with you in a way
that makes sense to you.
So your guides just form up out of the
consciousness system and communicate with you.
But it's a constant, consistent, interface.
It's your personal interface.
Well let's talk about something that
might be beyond just personal and where there's
a shared perception that's happening.
From as you say, a historical bit in a database.
And I'll give an example.
One time I was in a group.
We were doing some intuitive work
and people, one at a time,
would go on a journey after an event.
So that they were pretty loose in their consciousness
and they'd go on a journey.
And sometimes I'd tag along with them.
Just for kicks.
And be exactly where they were,
with who they were with,
seeing exactly what they were seeing.
So in this kind of experience
what's happening?
'Cause it was good only in that
it was a validation for some people--
That's very much like Dennis and I
taking an out of body trip together.
It's the same sort of thing.
So you're going to a historical
artifact together?
So it doesn't have to be,
and the only reason I bring it up
is because it's been, as you say,
suspended or conjured in a way to have familiarity.
It's just that another person could go along,
or multiple people can go along
and experience that same artifact.
They can and what they're doing
is they are sharing the experience.
Okay, we are consciousness.
Consciousness is all netted.
We communicate all the time.
We can kind of link and share our consciousness.
Another aspect of shared consciousness.
And we share consciousness,
we can do things together.
We can like have a single shared experience.
You can stand behind somebody at a lunch counter
and taste what they're eating.
You know? You can just taste the pickle they're chewing.
You know? And you can get into their reality like that.
It's data.
And if you understand how
you can access that data.
So you can share another person's experience.
You can look through their eyes.
You can feel their feelings,
see what they're seeing,
and be a part of that experience.
If you take that to a little wider thing,
you're talking about group consciousness.
Now group consciousness is basically,
I use math terms but it's a vector sum
of all the consciousness that are in the group.
If the group has a very low intent
then we call that mob consciousness, right?
And we know that it degenerates to the very lowest
common denominator in the mob.
And there's a lot of people in that mob acting
worse than they would ever act by themselves.
Well, that group consciousness descends
to the lowest common denominator
among all those consciousness,
the vector sum there.
The same thing happens on the other side.
You have a lot of people together who are
growing, loving, caring,
and supportive of each other,
They pull each other up.
Just like in the mob they drag each other down.
That's a group consciousness effect.
And then, you know, that's the hundredth monkey.
The hundredth monkey effect is that
they're all apart of a group,
they're sharing.
The consciousness is sharing.
The experience is sharing.
So people learn because somebody else
learned in their group and they're sharing it.
So it's a big up kind of experience for them.
And then you have even a bigger thing that's
let's say human wide or cultural wide
and now you're looking at Jung's Archetypes.
Where we all have certain kinds of symbols.
All across humanity in all kinds of cultures.
You know? We all have these symbols.
And those are kind of group mind
at the species level.
So you have all of this going on.
But the fundamental unit is an individual.
And you can share or you can not share.
It depends on your intent.
You have to intentionally share.
If you don't wanna share
you can turn that off
just like turning off a radio.
And you're not a part of it.
Okay, I have another one for you then.
Now this is another personal one
that Scott and I have talked about.
My son and I have certainly talked about a lot
because it involves him.
My son, almost since his birth,
who is now 27 years old.
We seem to be experiencing,
it's our own version like you and Dennis,
but virtually the same reality
throughout our whole lives.
And we don't, it's not contrived,
we'll find out afterward but
it can be as bizarre as,
he'll dislocate his shoulder
and I'll sprain my ankle the same day.
Or we both got a speeding ticket
in different cities the same morning.
Ended up in the same speeding school class.
That the instructor didn't think
that was very responsible of me.
But it can be everything from
down to the thoughts we're having.
We'll happen to talk.
Maybe we haven't talked in a week or so
and you know, I've been thinking about this.
And the other one will have been literally
contemplating the exact same thing.
But it's like that almost everyday of our lives.
What's happening there?
You're sharing.
Your consciousness and his consciousness
are sharing a lot of data and a lot of experience.
You're very close.
You know we can use another analogy.
People overwork this frequency analogy,
but you know say, like you're tuned.
Yes, that's what I feel.
That it's a frequency thing, yeah.
Of course frequency is just a metaphor.
It doesn't have anything to do with frequency.
Frequency's a physical matter thing.
Is it better to say a resonance?
Yeah, you could say a resonance is better.
So you have this closeness that resonates.
In his mind his intent
touches you all the time.
He has an intent that kind of captures you
and holds you in the back of his mind,
so you're there.
You do the same thing to him.
Even though it's totally unconscious?
Even though it's totally unconscious.
You and he are close enough that he's a part of you
and you're a part of him all the time.
We're netted.
We communicate all the time.
The two of you just communicate a lot more
than you do, say, with other people.
You constantly have this going back and fourth.
Your realities then tend to run parallel.
To an enlarged extent, as I discussed today,
you create your own reality.
Well, you two are on the same wavelength.
You're gonna create,
you're gonna interpret things similarly.
You're gonna kind of create a similar reality.
You're connected.
And that's often between mothers and sons.
Mothers and daughters, you know?
It's between best friends that grew up together
and have always been best friends their whole life.
They know when each other is in trouble.
One picks up the phone and says I just thought I'd call.
And the other one's just having a crisis.
They're connected.
And we share with all consciousness.
So if there's somebody on the other side
of this planet somewhere,
we can share with that person.
Or we can shut them out.
We tend to share more with the people we love
and care about and are close to.
We tend to shut out those that we don't know
because it's too much.
We can't deal with all that information.
Sometimes the people who are diagnosed
as schizophrenic or mentally ill
just can't shut it out.
They don't know how to turn it off.
And they do hear voices
and they hear stuff all the time
and it's very confusing to them.
And of course the diagnosis is they're crazy.
But basically they are hearing real voices.
Absolutely.
They just don't have the filter to filter it out
and the rest of us filter it out naturally.
Eventually once you understand reality
you can filter it out selectively.
You can kind of turn it on, turn it off as you want.
It's individual.
But that's going on with your intent.
You have lots of intentions that aren't intellectual.
They never get to your intellect.
You have a lot of intentions.
Things that you feel. Things that you want.
Things that you're interested in.
They all, you know, are part of your consciousness.
And all of those things are resonating
with wherever they happen to go.
Wherever they happen to be.
Wherever your intentions sends them.
Well the ones between you and your boy
are just more constant and a stronger focus
because you both stay focused on each other.
Yeah it's interesting.
Sometimes we just laugh,
I can't believe you just said that.
I just bought a new pair of shoes this morning too.
You know? Or whatever.
Let's talk about larger realities and predictive,
I guess you'd say tools.
Have you ever heard of Clif High?
Do you know Clif High's work by any chance?
No.
What Clif High does is
he's done a lot of computer modeling
and developed a lot of software in the past.
But what he found a long the way
and now has been doing for the last decade
is using mass global linguistics.
And his software will analyse, kind of,
spidering into forums around the world
or whatever the source is and start picking up
group key words in various languages
that start telling of what is rising from the group
subconscious or unconscious as to future events.
And has been quite successful in being able to put
out there by way of predictions every few months
what the future reality is likely to be.
And now you're getting into kind of
collective agreements,
collective resonance.
We're getting into going beyond time and space.
What's actually happening there?
Well there's several things.
And like most things in reality
there's always several ways that
something could happen, right?
It's very seldom so cut and dry that
this is the way that it always has to happen
and there couldn't be any other way.
One thing that could be going on there
is that it's not the data at all that he's getting.
That his collecting these words and tool,
and things that he has his computer do,
that's his tool.
That's his tool for collecting information.
In fact, the information he's getting
is of his own creation from his own consciousness.
And this collection out in the, you know,
it's very uncertain what he collects out there, right?
There's a lot of uncertainty about
what word will surface and what wont.
Whenever you have uncertainty like that,
that can be manipulated by the system
as we were talking about.
So those words may be coming up for him.
Not that these people are producing
words that then he is getting.
So it's not necessarily that all those people
in all those forums and all those things
are generating future information.
This is just his system just like
you know, the planets are to--
Albeit very complex.
Yeah it's very complex. Well so astrology, very complex.
The more complex the better it works
because there's more uncertainty
and more room for interpretation.
You can't, you know, simple systems
like the little pendulum are just yes and no.
You don't get a lot there other than yes or no.
You have a complex system
with a lot of uncertainty,
a lot of room for interpretation.
And it's, that can be manipulated to tell you things.
So he has an intent on the future, you know,
what's gonna happen in the future.
What's gonna happen next week or next month
or what's gonna happen with this event.
That intention connects then
with the probable future database.
Now his tool for receiving that
isn't a picture,
isn't spoken word,
isn't a pendulum swinging,
you know, isn't the stars and stuff.
His thing is gathering all this data
from all these sources, whatever.
So my guess is that all that data
from all those sources are irrelevant.
It's in his mind.
If you had somebody else,
just take somebody, you know,
some random person and here's a program
go take this program and find out
what's gonna happen next week by
surfing the net on all the forums
and see what key words come up,
it wouldn't work.
Interesting.
It doesn't work because
the one active ingredient isn't there
which is this guy's mind. You see?
It's the same way.
The computer makes a lousy astrologer
because what the active ingredient is
is the astrologers mind.
So you're saying by virtue
of the model of our virtual reality,
it has to be so that it always has to come
no matter what the system is,
no matter how accurate we may be using our tool,
that ultimately it's still being perceived
through our consciousness?
And that is the end of each story
no matter who's story?
The only active ingredient is consciousness.
Everything else is metaphor and tools.
We are consciousness that's what we are.
We are not, you know,
we are not a physical body
imagining that we have consciousness.
That's kind of the materialist reductions.
That's their point.
We are a consciousness imagining
that we have a physical body.
So we are fundamentally consciousness.
This is all just virtual, this physical stuff.
So we're consciousness,
you're consciousness, I'm consciousness
this guy's consciousness, we're all consciousness.
And as consciousness we are
fundamentally communicating with each other.
And as we work in these databases,
which is our right to work in
because this is consciousness.
That's where the data is
and we're part of that system.
We gather this data.
We need to have a tool to do that
because we have beliefs.
And if we don't have tools to do it
then we're lost.
If I don't have the pendulum
I can't tell whether an answer's yes or no.
You see?
We have to have our interface.
Some people's tool is just their intuition.
They get the answer, yes or no.
Some people hear it.
Some people have to swing pendulums.
Some people, you know, have to do stars and things.
Other people use Wigi boards.
You have all kinds of things that you can do.
They're all tools and they let you
focus your intent and collect the data.
So that would be my guess why he gets that.
See, otherwise we get wrapped up around this thing.
How could that be?
How could all these things bubble up
out of whatever and make sense?
And we get lost in it because we believe
that we live in an objective reality.
We don't.
We live in a statistical reality
and we're consciousness.
And that's why that stuff works.
It's just tools.
Well, I don't know how Clifford would feel
about hearing that information
because it certainly is, it's very empowering
on one level to say, and I know he has a dear friend
who has a lot of mystical qualities himself
who has suggested he's way more powerful
than he gives himself credit for.
But we'll just leave it at that,
however Clifford wants to respond.
Well, you know, people make their tools sacred.
Often the tools become sacred.
And you know, well, that's often
what religious worship about, you know?
It's the blaspheme of the scared tools.
And that's unfortunate
because then that turns into a belief,
the belief turns in a trap and then
you're limited to that thing.
If the only way you can interface
with the larger system is through this
very complex computer program
that's limiting.
You can pick simpler,
more effective tools
that suit you better.
And you can get the same data in other ways.
So in a way, you know,
tools are wonderful.
Otherwise we don't have an interface.
We have these beliefs that we need to
have something happen in order to get the information.
We can't just get it.
You know, we need the pendulum.
We need the tool.
We need the stars.
We need all this stuff
that justifies it to us
how we're doing it.
Because we have a belief
that you can't get anything
without something happening.
It doesn't have to happen that way.
We're consciousness.
It's just there.
We're a part of it.
We're all one.
We're all sharing data.
You don't have to have the tool.
But most of us can't live without them
because that's our interface.
That's how we, that's the metaphor.
The tool is the metaphor we make
for our connection to the larger reality.
So that's it and people will get upset.
You know, if you go to the reiki people
and you say, you know all those little symbols you do?
And you know, the touching of hands?
None of those are fundamental.
You don't need any of those symbols.
You can do all that without 'em.
The one's who really have gone past
their belief system will agree with you.
Yeah I know.
But the others will get very upset
that you've just basically blasphemed
against their sacred tool set.
And it upsets them a whole lot.
You know, religious tools are the same way.
People don't like it if you
don't act respectful toward their cross
or their five pointed star or whatever else it is?
Well it's the downside
of attachment in general.
But we can move beyond that.
And one thing that you were saying today
and I'll finish on this because literally
I could talk to you for many many hours.
There are so many other areas we could go into.
But I kind of, I like this one for an end point.
You were saying that the field of consciousness
is designed to help us succeed.
And that's really I think, a very potent
point of understanding for all of us.
If you wouldn't mind just
explaining that a little bit more.
It is, as you say, designed to help us succeed.
And by succeed I mean grow up.
Become love.
You know in my book I am a physicist
so I have technical descriptions, you know?
Reduce the entropy of your consciousness.
What we're talking about is spiritual growth
is another word you could say that.
And why does it help us?
You know, it's not like the grandfatherly
you know, image that wants to
come around and help us pet people.
That's not it.
Consciousness is an evolving system.
The way that system evolves is to lower
its entropy to grow toward becoming love.
That's the side of growth, okay?
De-evolving means falling apart.
Coming unglued.
Becoming nothing, right?
And the things that are devisive
that tear us apart are things like
ego, fear, you know,
all these things are high entropy things.
Love pulls us together.
It's a unifying.
It's a building structure.
Not tearing things apart.
So that's what the consciousness system is doing.
It's just a system, a natural system.
Just like the environment is a system on this planet.
Just like the solar system is just a system
that does what it does.
The consciousness system is a natural system.
It's evolving toward love.
We are part of that evolution.
We're part of that evolution cycle.
That's part of how it evolves is through us.
We are consciousness.
Part of the way it evolves is
put little pieces of itself like us
to interact with each other.
So that we can exercise freewill,
our intent, make good decisions,
and grow our being.
That's what we're here for.
That's our purpose.
So why would it not help us?
We are it, it is us.
We are part of that evolution that it needs
to not dissolve and turn into nothing.
So yes it helps us.
It sets up this physical reality,
our universe as a learning lab
for us to learn in.
That's trying to help us.
And now here we are in this learning lab
and sometimes we're a little thick-headed
and we just don't get it.
It'll nudge us.
How does it nudge us?
I had an engineer who thought
all of this was just so much bologna.
Until one night he had a dream
and he saw that he was in an airplane.
And in this airplane everyone was in
black and white except one little girl.
And one little girl about six years old was in color.
He knew about planes.
He knew exactly what kind of plane it was.
The manufacturer, you know, and that sort of thing.
That was part of his engineering.
So he knew those kinds of things.
Well, the very next day a plane crashed.
Everyone was killed but one little girl.
And he looked at the passenger list
and the number of people and the plane that it was.
It was the same plane with the same count of people on it.
And he said he could see everyone one of those people.
You know, they were in black and white but he saw
if they had wrinkles he saw their wrinkles.
This was in detail, you know, just like being there.
And it hit him like a ton of bricks.
Now why did that happen to him?
That's a nudge from the larger consciousness system.
That opened his mind.
Suddenly he could not explain that away.
And he had a bigger reality than it had the day before.
That's just a, you know,
a wedge in the door to open it up.
A lot of our things from simple things
to deja vu, to synchronicity,
to these precognitive dreams like that,
telepathy, you know, like yourself,
you and your son, you know?
All of these experiences that aren't exactly
normal are things to open up our doors.
It's to let us know,
hey, the reality's bigger than you think.
Otherwise how could you do this?
How could you know that that plane was gonna crash
and the people who'd be on it
and who wouldn't survive?
How cold you know that?
Because he had that dream
a day or two before the plane crashed.
Before those people ever got on the plane.
Probably before some of them ever bought their tickets.
You know, how did you know that?
So suddenly his reality was thrown open.
Well when people have that happen
they start searching for answers.
They start reading things.
You know, they start looking at the literature.
They start going to the web.
So this is an opening thing.
So those kinds of things are done to wake us up.
You know? It's a wake up call.
It's a nudge to grow up.
To look at the bigger reality.
To see something beside your job and the TV.
You know, and keeping up with the neighbors
and those kinds of things that occupy us.
So that's why the system goes through that trouble
to help us evolve because we are part of it's evolution.
It evolves as it evolves, we evolve as it evolves.
So of course it would help us.
And it has lost of wiggle room
in the uncertainty around our rule set
and around our history that it can operate in.
And it does.
And we use that for our own creation.
We use that for our creation, exactly.
We are consciousness.
And consciousness is us.
You see? So we're all apart of this thing.
We can create too.
It's not just that this larger consciousness creates
and we just sit here and go through the,
you know, interact with it.
But we also can create and modify things
and change those probabilities.
We can nudge others as well.
It's just a matter of understanding how it all works.
And then learning how to access it,
how to control it and how to use it.
Well, I think that pretty much says it all.
Well it doesn't say it all as I said.
There's a lot more.
So anybody wanting to know more about it
can go to your site and take a look at some of the
conferences you have coming up
and also purchase some of the books.
Start going on their own.
You've been lecturing all day.
I really appreciate your taking the time
after all of that to speak with us.
It's been a long day for you.
You're very welcome.
My pleasure.
Thank you.
To explore Tom's work further
you can attend one of his workshops
on remote viewing or pick up a copy
of My Big Toe.
All of which you can connect with at
my-big-toe.com
each word has a hyphen between it.
If this kind of information is powerful for you
you might also enjoy our interviews with
Amit Goswami and Dean Radin.
Until next time.
Thanks for watching CMN.